Exercise 1.1: Getting Started with Python
Learning Goals

- Summarize the uses and benefits of Python for web development
- Prepare your developer environment for programming with Python

Reflection Questions

- In your own words, what is the difference between frontend and backend web development? If you were hired to work on backend programming for a web application, what kinds of operations would you be working on?

If I were hired to do backend programming for a web application, I’d be working on operations like:

1. Building and maintaining APIs (endpoints the frontend calls)
2. Reading/writing data to databases (CRUD operations)
3. Authentication and authorization (login, sessions/tokens, access control)
4. Validating and sanitizing incoming data
5. Handling errors and logging
6. Integrating third-party services (payments, email, file storage, external APIs)
7. Improving performance and security (rate limiting, caching, secure password storage, etc.)

- Imagine you’re working as a full-stack developer in the near future. Your team is asking for your advice on whether to use JavaScript or Python for a project, and you think Python would be the better choice. How would you explain the similarities and differences between the two languages to your team? Drawing from what you learned in this Exercise, what reasons would you give to convince your team that Python is the better option?

The main differences:

1. Where they’re most commonly used: JavaScript is the default language of the browser, so it dominates frontend development. Python is extremely common on the backend and in fields like automation, data analysis, scripting, and AI/ML.
2. Syntax and readability: Python is designed to be readable and concise, which makes it easier to maintain and understand—especially when working in teams.
3. Ecosystem strengths: JavaScript has a massive web ecosystem (especially for frontend and full-stack with Node.js). Python has a huge ecosystem for backend development, scripting, automation, and data work.

Why I’d recommend Python for a project:
1. Speed of development: Python’s clean syntax helps teams build features faster and reduces boilerplate.
2. Maintainability: Python code is typically easier to read and reason about, which helps long-term maintenance and onboarding.
3. Versatility: Python can handle web backend work and also support automation, scripting, and data-heavy features without switching languages.
4. Strong library support: Python has excellent libraries/frameworks for backend development and for security-related features (like password hashing) and general tooling.
5. Great for scaling skills: Even if the project starts small, Python keeps the door open for adding analytics, automation, or other data-focused features later.

- Now that you’ve had an introduction to Python, write down 3 goals you have for yourself and your learning during this Achievement.

Build strong fundamentals in Python for backend work  
I want to get comfortable with Python syntax, functions, modules, and writing clean code so I can confidently build backend logic without relying on copy/paste.

Learn backend patterns that translate to real-world jobs  
I want to understand how Python is used in realistic backend workflows—working with APIs, handling requests/responses, validating input, error handling, authentication, and working with databases.

Create portfolio-ready Python projects and a repeatable workflow  
By the end of this Achievement, I want to have at least one project that shows real backend skills and a professional workflow (virtual environments, requirements.txt, organized repo structure, and clear documentation). After this Achievement, I see myself working on full-stack projects where Python powers the backend and I can deploy and maintain it like a real product.







Exercise 1.2: Data Types in Python
Learning Goals

- Explain variables and data types in Python
- Summarize the use of objects in Python
- Create a data structure for your Recipe app

Reflection Questions

- Imagine you’re having a conversation with a future colleague about whether to use the iPython Shell instead of Python’s default shell. What reasons would you give to explain the benefits of using the iPython Shell over the default one?

It gives you better features that are easier to use in comparison to the default REPL. It has things like auto-tab complete, multi line editing and syntax highlighting. It just speeds up the experimentation process

- Python has a host of different data types that allow you to store and organize information. List 4 examples of data types that Python recognizes, briefly define them, and indicate whether they are scalar or non-scalar.

Data type      Definition                     Scalar or Non-Scalar?
int            whole numbers                  scalar
float          deciman numbers                scalar
str            text data like "hello"         non
list           ordered, a collection of items non

- A frequent question at job interviews for Python developers is: what is the difference between lists and tuples in Python?

Lists and tuples are both ordered collections, but the key difference is mutability. A list is mutable, meaning you can add, remove, or change elements after creation. A tuple is immutable, meaning once it’s created, you can’t change its contents. Because tuples don’t change, they’re often used for fixed data (like coordinates) and can be used as dictionary keys (if they contain only hashable items), while lists cannot. Lists are more flexible for data that you expect to update frequently.

- For a language-learning flashcard app, which structure would you choose?

For a language-learning flashcard app, I’d use a dictionary for each flashcard because each card has named attributes like word, definition, and category. Dictionaries make the data easy to read and access by key (e.g., card["definition"]) and are flexible if I later add fields like example_sentence, difficulty, or times_reviewed. Then I’d store multiple flashcards in a list (e.g., all_cards = [card1, card2, ...]) because the app needs an ordered, sequential set of cards that users can shuffle, loop through, add to, or remove from over time.







Exercise 1.3: Functions and Other Operations in Python
Learning Goals

- Implement conditional statements in Python to determine program flow
- Use loops to reduce time and effort in Python programming
- Write functions to organize Python code

Reflection Questions

Travel App Script:

destination = input("Where would you like to travel? ").strip().lower()

if destination == "paris":
    print("Enjoy your stay in Paris!")
elif destination == "tokyo":
    print("Enjoy your stay in Tokyo!")
elif destination == "new york":
    print("Enjoy your stay in New York!")
else:
    print("Oops, that destination is not currently available.")

- Explain logical operators in Python.

They're used to combine conditional statements - and, or, and not. Theyre useful for when you need more complex decision making like if you needed to check to see if the cooking time is blow low and easy, and there are only a few ingredients that are needed.

- What are functions in Python?

They are blocks of code that do a specific task- they are usable anywhere in the code and can be called upon as many times as necessary  
They're useful because you dont need to repeat code throughout the project, leading to it looking/being more professional and organized adn they break the larger part of projects up into smaller more manageable tasks

- Progress toward goals so far:

The situation at hand so far is incredibly unique and i am making steady progress forward into completing this program before it shuts down indefinitely and terminates all contracts.







Exercise 1.4: File Handling in Python
Learning Goals

- Use files to store and retrieve data in Python

Reflection Questions

- Why is file storage important?

Its important becasuse it allows the program to save data perminanently instead of losing it every time you run something. Without that, the data would only be there while the program is running then be deleted afterwards which is obviously a problem

- What are pickles?

Pickels are python objects that are made into bytes so they can be saved, stored, and restored as they were initially. I would use it when i want to quickly save objects and reload them later somewhere else in the same project

- How do you find your current directory?

you would import os then use os.getcwd()

- How do you prevent a crash from an error?

to prevent a total crash i would use try and except blocks

- Reflection halfway through Achievement 1:

im used to JavaScript and everything from the main part of the program so this is all new but the logic behind it all makes solid sense. Proud of all of the progress that i have made in total, and proud of how much work i have been able to do in the few days before this program is shut down.








Exercise 1.5: Object-Oriented Programming in Python
Learning Goals

- Apply object-oriented programming concepts to your Recipe app

Reflection Questions

- In your own words, what is object-oriented programming? What are the benefits of OOP?

Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a way of structuring code around “objects” that contain both data (attributes) and behavior (methods). Instead of writing a bunch of separate functions that pass data around, OOP groups related functionality together inside a class. The benefits are that code becomes easier to organize, reuse, and scale. OOP also helps keep programs cleaner by making it easier to manage complexity, avoid repetition, and model real-world things in code.

- What are objects and classes in Python? Come up with a real-world example to illustrate how objects and classes work.

A class is like a blueprint that defines what an object should look like and what it can do. An object is a specific instance created from that class. For example, a “Car” class might define attributes like color, make, and mileage, and methods like start(), stop(), and drive(). A specific object could be “my_blue_honda”, which has its own color, mileage, and can perform those methods. In the Recipe app, the Recipe class is the blueprint, and each recipe (Tea, Coffee, etc.) is an object.

- In your own words, write brief explanations of the following OOP concepts; 100 to 200 words per method is fine.

Method: Inheritance
Inheritance is when one class (the child/subclass) is built from another class (the parent/superclass). The child class automatically gets the parent class’s attributes and methods, and can also add new ones or override existing ones. This helps reduce duplicated code because you don’t have to rewrite shared behavior across similar classes. For example, you might have a base class “Recipe” and then create a subclass “BakedRecipe” that inherits everything from Recipe but adds baking-specific details like oven_temperature. Inheritance is useful when you have a clear “is-a” relationship between objects and want to build a hierarchy.

Method: Polymorphism
Polymorphism means “many forms,” and in programming it means different classes can share the same method name but behave differently. For example, multiple classes might have a method called display(), but each class implements it in a way that makes sense for its own data. This is powerful because it lets you write code that works with many different object types in a consistent way. In Python, polymorphism is common because Python focuses on behavior rather than strict type matching (“duck typing”). If an object supports the required method, the code can call it regardless of the object’s class.

Method: Operator Overloading
Operator overloading is when you define or customize how operators like +, -, ==, or < work for your own objects. In Python, this is done using special “dunder” methods like __add__ (for +) or __eq__ (for ==). It allows objects to behave more naturally when used with operators. For example, you could overload + for Recipe objects so that combining two recipes merges their ingredient lists (not something you’d always do, but it shows the idea). Operator overloading can make code cleaner and easier to read when used appropriately, because it lets operations feel intuitive for custom classes.






Exercise 1.6: Connecting to Databases in Python

Learning Goals
- Create a MySQL database for your Recipe app

Reflection Questions

- What are databases and what are the advantages of using them?

A database is an organized system for storing and managing data so it can be saved permanently, searched quickly, and updated safely. The advantages are that databases handle large amounts of data efficiently, let you query/filter/sort data with SQL, support multiple users/apps accessing the same data at the same time, and help keep data consistent through things like constraints and relationships. They’re also more reliable than storing everything in memory or in random files because they’re designed for long-term storage, backups, and structured organization.

- List 3 data types that can be used in MySQL and describe them briefly:

Data type    Definition
VARCHAR(n)   Text/string data with a maximum length of n characters (good for names/titles).
INT          Whole numbers (good for IDs, quantities, counts).
FLOAT        Decimal numbers (good for prices, measurements, ratings).

- In what situations would SQLite be a better choice than MySQL?

SQLite is a better choice when you want something lightweight and simple that doesn’t require running a separate database server. It’s great for small projects, local development/testing, prototypes, single-user apps, and situations where you want a portable database file (like a .db file) that can be shipped with an application. It’s also useful when you don’t need heavy multi-user support, advanced permissions, or high-concurrency performance.

- Think back to what you learned in the Immersion course. What do you think about the differences between JavaScript and Python as programming languages?

JavaScript and Python are both high-level languages, but they feel different in practice. JavaScript is everywhere on the web (especially frontend) and uses braces/semicolons with lots of flexibility, while Python is designed for readability with indentation-based structure and generally cleaner syntax. JavaScript’s async patterns (promises/async-await) are core to many workflows, while Python can do async too but it’s less “front and center” for beginners. Python tends to be faster to write and easier to read for scripts and backend logic, and it has a huge ecosystem for automation and data tasks, while JavaScript shines when you need browser-native behavior or full-stack JS with Node.

- Now that you’re nearly at the end of Achievement 1, consider what you know about Python so far. What would you say are the limitations of Python as a programming language?

Python can be slower than compiled languages (like C/C++/Java) for CPU-heavy workloads, so performance can become a limitation at scale unless you offload work to optimized libraries or services. It also isn’t the best choice for certain environments like very strict real-time systems or high-performance game engines. Packaging and distributing Python apps can be a little messy compared to some ecosystems, especially across different operating systems. And while Python is great for many backend tasks, it isn’t the native language of the browser, so frontend work still typically requires JavaScript/TypeScript.






Exercise 1.7: Finalizing Your Python Program
Learning Goals

⦁    Interact with a database using an object-relational mapper
⦁    Build your final command-line Recipe application


Reflection Questions

⦁    What is an Object Relational Mapper and what are the advantages of using one?

An Object Relational Mapper (ORM) is a tool that lets you interact with a database using Python objects and methods instead of writing raw SQL for everything. You define “models” (classes) that map to tables, and then you can create, read, update, and delete rows by working with those objects. The advantages are: cleaner and more readable code, less repeated SQL, safer queries (less risk of SQL injection when done correctly), and easier maintenance as your app grows. It also makes it simpler to switch or adapt database logic because your code is built around Python objects rather than database-specific SQL patterns.

⦁    By this point, you’ve finished creating your Recipe app. How did it go? What’s something in the app that you did well with? If you were to start over, what’s something about your app that you would change or improve?

Overall it went well, especially once the database connection and the ORM setup were working consistently. The part I did well was building a menu-driven program that actually supports the full CRUD workflow (create, view, search, edit, delete) and doesn’t immediately crash when a user types something unexpected. If I started over, I’d improve the UX and structure: I’d add clearer prompts and validation messages, add a “confirm” step before committing edits, and I’d refactor the code into smaller helper functions (and possibly separate files) to make it easier to maintain long-term. I’d also add automated tests and more consistent formatting for output.

⦁    Imagine you’re at a job interview. You’re asked what experience you have creating an app using Python. Taking your work for this Achievement as an example, draft how you would respond to this question.

I built a complete command-line Recipe application in Python from scratch. I started by working with core Python data structures and functions, then moved into file handling and persistence, and finally connected the app to a MySQL database. For the final version, I used SQLAlchemy as an ORM to map Python classes to database tables and perform CRUD operations in an object-oriented way. The app includes input validation, a menu-based user flow, ingredient-based searching, editing and deleting records, and proper session/connection handling. This project gave me hands-on experience building a practical Python application with persistent storage and a structured codebase.

⦁    You’ve finished Achievement 1! Before moving on to Achievement 2, take a moment to reflect on your learning in the course so far:
⦁    What went well during this Achievement?
⦁    What’s something you’re proud of?
⦁    What was the most challenging aspect of this Achievement?
⦁    Did this Achievement meet your expectations? Did it give you the confidence to start working with your new Python skills?
⦁    What’s something you want to keep in mind to help you do your best in Achievement 2?

What went well: I stayed consistent and got through every section even when the setup and tooling felt confusing at first. I also learned how to connect the “why” behind Python concepts to real features in an app.
What I’m proud of: I built a real working program that persists data, supports searching/editing/deleting, and uses a real database with an ORM. That feels like something I can actually show and talk about.
Most challenging: Environment setup and keeping everything organized (venvs, paths, MySQL tools, and making sure I was in the right folder/using the right interpreter). Debugging connection and dependency issues took the most time.
Did it meet expectations/confidence: Yes. I feel way more comfortable reading and writing Python now, and I understand how Python connects to databases and how ORMs fit into real development.
Keep in mind for Achievement 2: Keep things organized early (folders, venv, requirements), test small pieces frequently, and don’t wait until the end to catch bugs. Also, write down setup steps as I go so I don’t lose time re-learning what I did last time.


Well done—you’ve now completed the Learning Journal for Achievement 1. As you’ll have seen, a little metacognition can go a long way!


Pre-Work: Before You Start Achievement 2

In the final part of the learning journal for Achievement 1, you were asked if there’s anything—on reflection—that you’d keep in mind and do similarly or differently during Achievement 2. Think about these questions again:

⦁    Was your study routine effective during Achievement 1? If not, what will you do differently during Achievement 2?

It was effective in the sense that I stayed productive and finished the work, but it could be more structured. In Achievement 2, I want to timebox sessions (example: 60–90 minutes), take short notes while I work, and end each session by writing the next 3 concrete steps so I can start faster the next day. I also want to do more “mini reviews” where I summarize what I learned after each section.

⦁    Reflect on your learning and project work for Achievement 1. What were you most proud of? How will you repeat or build on this in Achievement 2?

I’m most proud of finishing a full CRUD application and connecting it to MySQL using SQLAlchemy. To build on that in Achievement 2, I want to focus on building projects that look more like real production apps: better structure, cleaner separation of concerns, and more testing. I also want to keep pushing toward portfolio-ready work and making sure each project is documented clearly.

⦁    What difficulties did you encounter in the last Achievement? How did you deal with them? How could this experience prepare you for difficulties in Achievement 2?

The main difficulties were environment/tooling issues and getting stuck on small errors that came from being in the wrong folder, missing a dependency, or using the wrong shell/tool mode. I dealt with it by slowing down, checking paths carefully, using error messages as clues, and testing step-by-step instead of changing five things at once. This prepares me for Achievement 2 because I’m more patient with setup, I know to verify small assumptions early (versions, venv, correct interpreter), and I’m more confident troubleshooting errors without panicking.









